.TH CX 1 "March 2026" "cx 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cx \- fast code search tool for Claude subagent context retrieval
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cx
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I pattern
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cx
is a fast, mmap-based code search tool that recursively searches a directory
tree for files containing a given literal string or regular expression pattern.
Results are sorted by match density (match count divided by total line count),
with the most relevant files listed first.
.PP
.B cx
is designed to be called as a tool by a Claude AI subagent.
Using
.B cx
instead of broad file reads allows an agent to locate relevant code without
consuming large numbers of context tokens on files that do not contain the
symbol or pattern being searched for.
The
.B \-\-json
output mode produces machine-readable output intended for programmatic
consumption by the agent.
.PP
On the first search in a directory tree, pass
.B \-\-reindex
to build a trigram index under
.IR .cx/ .
Subsequent searches will use the index to narrow the set of candidate files
before scanning, significantly reducing search time on large codebases.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I pattern
The search pattern (required). Treated as a literal string by default.
Pass
.B \-r
to enable RE2 regular expression mode.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-path " " \fIdir\fR
Directory to search. Defaults to the current working directory.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-type " " \fIext\fR " [" \fIext\fR "...]"
Restrict search to files with the given extension(s).
Multiple extensions may be supplied: \fB\-t .cpp .h\fR.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-ignore\-case
Perform a case-insensitive search. Has no effect in regex mode (use
inline RE2 flags such as
.B (?i)
instead).
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-regex
Treat
.I pattern
as an RE2 regular expression rather than a literal string.
Regex mode bypasses the trigram index and scans all candidate files.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output results as a JSON array.
Each element contains
.BR file ,
.BR match_count ,
.BR density ,
and a
.B matches
array of
.RB { line ", " content }
objects.
When there are no matches the output is
.BR [] .
.TP
.B \-\-files\-only
Print only file paths and match counts, omitting per-line match content.
When combined with
.B \-\-json
the
.B matches
array is omitted from each result object.
.TP
.BI \-\-limit " N"
Return at most
.I N
results, ordered by density descending.
Useful for controlling token usage when cx is called by an agent.
.TP
.BI \-\-threads " N"
Use
.I N
worker threads for parallel file scanning.
Defaults to
.BR std::thread::hardware_concurrency() .
Minimum: 1.
.TP
.B \-\-reindex
Build or rebuild the trigram index under
.I .cx/
in the search directory, then run the search.
After the index is built a background inotify watcher is started that
incrementally updates the index as files are created or modified.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .cx/files
Newline-separated list of indexed file paths.
Line N (0-based) is the path for file ID N.
.TP
.I .cx/postings
Binary posting lists: for each trigram, a length-prefixed array of uint32_t
file IDs sorted in ascending order.
.TP
.I .cx/lookup
Binary sorted array of {uint32_t trigram_hash, uint64_t postings_offset}
pairs.
Memory-mapped at query time; binary-searched to locate posting lists.
.TP
.I .gitignore
If present in the search root,
.B cx
reads this file and skips matching files and directories.
Supported patterns: exact paths, \fB*.ext\fR globs, and directory names
ending in
.BR / .
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Search for all occurrences of \fBstd::vector\fR in C++ sources:
.B cx
.B std::vector
.B \-t .cpp .h
.TP
Build the index for the current tree and search with JSON output:
.B cx
.B malloc
.B \-\-reindex
.B \-\-json
.TP
Find which files define a struct, limited to 5 results for an agent call:
.B cx
.B "struct MyStruct"
.B \-\-json
.B \-\-files\-only
.B \-\-limit 5
.TP
Regex search for function definitions, ignoring the build directory:
.B cx
.B "^[a-z].*\\\\(.*\\\\) \\\\{"
.B \-\-regex
.B \-t .cpp
.B \-\-json
.TP
Search the Linux kernel source (4-thread, JSON, no index):
.B cx
.B "copy_from_user"
.B \-p /usr/src/linux
.B \-\-threads 4
.B \-\-json
.B \-\-limit 20
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B cx
exits 0 on success and non-zero on fatal error (e.g. index build failure).
Finding no matches is not an error and exits 0.
.SH NOTES
.B cx
is intentionally designed to be invoked as a bash tool by a Claude AI subagent.
The recommended workflow is:
.IP 1. 3
Call
.B cx \-\-files\-only \-\-json
to locate candidate files.
.IP 2. 3
Call
.B cx \-\-json \-\-limit N
on the most relevant files to retrieve match context.
.IP 3. 3
Use the returned file paths and line numbers to read only the relevant
sections with a file-read tool.
.PP
This avoids reading entire files into the agent's context window.
.SH AUTHORS
cx contributors
